got a reasonably deep and profound
letter here that I'm probably gonna have
a fairly brief and she'll a response to
but I appreciate all this kind of email
I'm sorry if the lighting is strobing in
and out I'm doing the best I can you
know Morty's on vacation the regular
lighting tech isn't here we got a bunch
of interns from the kunming school of
video production helping out at a bottle
sale Broadcasting Network I don't know
what it is but hey hopefully you're not
here for the video quality and strobe
lighting effects the letter goes as
folks this is from one of my many
patreon supporters thank you people who
pay one dollar a month to eat this kind
of content being created and by the way
that one dollar a month it may not sound
like much money to you if you live in a
scenic southern Texas where the cost of
living is very high but it is actually a
lot of money to me because I live in
couldn't make China where my salary is
abysmal Ehlo okay so the letter goes as
follows
my wife is starting a vegan food stall
with a view to a cafe slash diner in the
future she a pretty she appreciated your
remarks in the recent video on
short-term versus long-term goals in
veganism etc so that video I think was
uploaded yesterday I'm wondering if you
could offer advice on what I'd call
quote the acquisition of perspective
close quote a lot of your videos seem to
draw heavily from past experiences and
the perspective those experiences give
you for some of us living in one country
working in one industry knowing only one
major religion in your area etc etc can
really inhibit your ability to have a
worldly perspective not to say that
permanent vacation as' are somehow wiser
lol but I hope you know what I mean I
don't think it's reasonable to tell
everyone to live overseas for a time so
there has to be an alternative for me
personally I'm acutely aware of examples
where I lack perspective indigenous
history and issues in Australia for
example I care deeply about them but I'm
not well-versed in them I can fix that
and I've been working on that lately my
next book my next-door neighbors are an
indigenous family exclamation point
deforestation in Southeast Asia though
where the would I start
a lot of the well-rounded useful
knowledge and perspective on issues like
that really can't come from Google
skills he says I feel but I'm open to
disagreement end of sentence thought
that was the middle of the sentence that
was the end of the sentence he's open to
disagreement I could go on with examples
but I think quote the acquisition of
perspective in pursuit of improving your
knowledge and reasoning on specific
topics and on old topics is pretty
universally important well thank you
thank you for giving me a question that
is so meaningful and substantive that
I'm now going to embarrass myself by
giving you a relatively short and catty
answer and I'm wearing the worst t-shirt
for this - right it's yeah yeah yeah the
t-shirt um yeah so look I'm gonna be a
hundred percent honest with you because
that's my that's my steez um you can
meet people who've been all around the
world and they come back just as
ignorant as they were when they started
on the journey right it's depressing and
soul-crushing but it's true and maybe
that is one of the things you only learn
by actually going out and traveling
around the world in person you might
assume the people who are worldly that
people who have those tremendous
experiences whether in business or in
tourism or otherwise that they you know
inevitably they become wiser or they get
a more balanced and profound
appreciation for what life is nothing
could be further from the truth
very often I mean this is one of those
things where you only you only see you
only see things when you're willing to
see them you only tend to you know
recognize what is you're looking for
I mean I'll use an example that came up
in a recent video in my video that was
fairly popular about the use of soap
there was this guy who disagree with me
on that who believed in so-called
natural hygiene who a man who even who
refused to use soap and his evidence to
support his view of the world was that
when he was in India he said the the
peasants in India the poor people in
India they don't use soap and they're
all healthy all the time they don't have
any health problems
now you mentioned here the contrast to
Google skills you could very rapidly and
easily
Google skills discover exactly what
health problems people have in rural
India poor peasants have or poor people
in general have an India right Google
skills could reveal that immediately
going to the library book learning could
give you that kind of background very
quickly and easily but you'd have to
know to ask the question you'd have to
know why it mattered you have to know
that you were that you were interested
ask the question and in the other hand
somebody can go to India and do
humanitarian work and leave amongst the
poor and help the poor and hand out
sacks of rice to the poor and never see
the problem they they can just go there
wanting to believe that India is
paradise maybe a spiritual paradise
maybe for some other reason they're
attached to a glory glamorized glorified
notion of of what indian society is
supposed to be and they don't see it at
all
by the same token people can travel
around Laos and not see any of the
problems with drug addiction it's just a
very typical example they think these
people are innocent and pure because
they're living in poverty and therefore
they don't have a bunch of drug addicts
going from downtown and they do it
allows the whole country has serious
problems drug addiction um not
surprising they're human beings too etc
etc but if you're not looking for it in
a sense it's not even there to be seen I
had a report quite a detailed research
on hiv/aids as I recall this is from
memory but at the peak of the hiv/aids
epidemic in pnom Penh Cambodia the
capital city of Cambodia one out of four
police officers contracted HIV AIDS it
was quite a short period of time but
this office is decimated the police
force everyone in the police force at
that time right wanted a job in
government they would have known
somebody that would have met somebody
who contracted AIDS and died of AIDS
right now I'm sorry that statistic is
from memory I could tell you the report
that I got that from this detailed
research very interesting um obviously
you can go there and see none of this
and on the other hand you can go there
and only see a bad stereotype of what's
going on
you could go to Cambodia and think it's
all violence and all poverty and all
oppression
you can go there and see none of these
things so I mean what you're really
getting at with this question is what is
the relationship between empirical
experience and research and learning and
adapting your own perspective in the
world now really the other ending that I
have to tell here is one that I
mentioned in passing a very long time
ago but I do remember making the video
and I remember actually sending the the
link to my parents because it was one of
my few videos in which I said something
nice about my father
overall I did not have very positive
relation with my parents but one of the
few things really wise things my father
said to me when I was growing up he
discussed with me his theory it's just
his own little pet philosophy of the
difference between attitudinal learning
and factual learning learning and
attitude towards the world and attitude
towards facts and attitude towards
experience as opposed to learning
particular facts or having particular
experiences these are two fundamentally
different things and my father asked the
question broadly how do we actually
approach attitudinal learning right now
the example he chose is an example that
means a lot to me if you guys don't know
I'm a former student of Cree in a jib
way involved with First Nations politics
languages it's the way I care about I'm
not an expert but it's something I
enrolled in a university program to
study something I care about and it
means a lot to me the example my father
actually used at that time was Native
Americans
aka American Indians First Nations he
said you know you can take someone and
show them an archeological site you know
the remains of a destroyed indigenous
civilization do they learn particular
facts do they learn what year this was
built or what year it was destroyed or
when the Europeans showed up and killed
everybody is that what matters maybe
what really matters is a shift in
attitude of trying to get across the
people these people lived here thousands
of years ago their history matters they
have their own history they have their
own story to tell and it's important and
meaningful in its own way right maybe
what you're trying to that that's not
even a fact
you're just trying to get an attitudinal
shift so that people who maybe showed up
just with the stereotyped image that
they had from cartoons or from primary
school from their school education where
they just imagine native people are
sitting around a campfire with no
civilization of their own to have a
shift in attitude towards appreciating
these people did have their own
civilization and then again that can
lead to people asking questions that can
lead to people doing original research
I guess I'll throw in a third anecdote
that I think I've never told here before
I remember exactly who it was who said
that said I'm choosing not to say his
name but I went to a lecture on a
university campus and this guy I
appreciated his his honesty and at least
this this regard this anecdote many
other things he said were dishonest but
anyway this guy gave a long lecture and
then there were questions in the
audience at the end and in response to
one of the questions the audience he
said look when I was a kid I was a snob
and he said I went up to a an elite
Jesuit priest to ask this question
because I didn't want to ask my local
parish priest I didn't want to ask some
local lowly representative the Catholic
Church or one of this elite Jesuit
highly respected and he had a PhD or
something some celebrated scholars Bible
and I asked very simply he was a child
at the time he said how can I find God
and the Jesuits answer was - laughs you
know I assumed it was a very contented
and happy laughter he laughed he put his
hand on the child's shoulder and replied
the fact that you are looking means that
he has already found you now you guys
know I'm not just an atheist I am a
nihilistic atheist and I'm a nihilistic
atheist that does not have much patience
for the Catholic Church and its history
of atrocities etc etc however I think
it's very interesting that we could
actually take that reflection and apply
it to this question but deleting God
from
equation the fact that you're searching
the fact that you're looking for God the
fact that you're searching but it's not
God we're talking about here that
already is actually the most fundamental
thing right that's exactly what you
can't teach people that's what people
can't learn when they buy the airplane
ticket and they can't learn on the
airplane and they can't learn when they
get off the airplane and after they get
off the airplane it doesn't matter if
they go to the beach or they go to the
Buddhist monastery if they didn't
already have the question in a sense
also to be honest if they didn't already
have the methodology for how to find the
answer how to search then they're gonna
get nothing out of it
all right so here's an answer that I'm
absolutely certain I've never told the
internet before um I got an email once
from a guy and he was talking to me
because he was interested in Buddhism
and Buddhist philosophy and he had just
made an extensive tour an extensive trip
around Buddhist monasteries of Thailand
and in his tour he asked one Buddhist
monk after another at highly esteemed
but foreign friendly monasteries what
exactly does the Buddha say about
emptiness what exactly is the Buddhist
philosophy of no soul I think that was
the whole question I think it was the
whole question was what what exactly is
the Buddhist teaching on this
fundamental issue and nobody could give
him an answer and he summarized for me
discussed the the evasive answers that
the different Buddhist monks gave him
and some of the Buddhist monks or I
guess many ultimately they've referred
him to other Buddhist monks they said
okay well I can't answer your question
you can go to this other Buddhist
monastery and ask this other Buddhist
monk so in some ways this guy had a
delightful vacation he went from one
Buddhist monastery to another in
Thailand asking the same philosophical
question again and again what actually
is the Buddha's teaching on emptiness
and on no soul ie that there is no soul
but another sense he had a very
dissatisfactory vacation because nobody
could answer his question and not even
remotely cuz I'd like to gave the wrong
answer
none of the Buddhist monks felt
confident to even do the google
searching to put it that way and
presented with something now
given the whole context of the
conversation how Ithaca by email I am
actually hundred percent confident that
he was really being honest with me he
was describing ie was me he was naming
the monasteries he went to and
everything and his story in many ways it
was entirely believable to me and I
remember when I told this to a former
Buddhist monk or retired but his monk
because to me it was indicative of the
level of textual ignorance ignorance of
Scripture even in these supposedly elite
Buddhist monasteries in Thailand I
remember this this Buddhist ex Buddhist
monk retired Buddhist monk said to me he
said I don't believe it
he said I don't believe the story he
said there are so many Buddhist monks
who know about you know that kind of but
his philosophy and talk about it all the
time and no it's not labeled me as I
don't wrong because he didn't ask for
the monks opinion he asked what is the
Buddha's teaching on this he didn't ask
for a sermon he didn't say can you
improvise a lecture on philosophy to me
the same way you would for a bunch of
peasants in Thailand right he said I
want to know what the Buddha actually
said or what the Buddha actually taught
on this issue and he asked in English he
also wasn't asking in Thai which is
probably in some ways more intimidating
right that this guy actor has to go and
get like a you know like a Bible score
he's got to get the page number he's got
to actually find out and none of them
can do that that's what they can't do
it's not that they can't you
it's not that they can't improvise a
lecture right so to me again this I'm
sorry this may seem like a viewer very
far off from the original question but
in terms of this you know most
fundamental matter of how do we gain
perspective on things in this case you
have to understand the question you have
to understand who you're asking how
you're asking where the information
comes
from and even the sets of methodology
that are related to the answer now I
recognize this is not the answer you
were probably expecting from me I think
most people would approach a question of
this kind with a set notion that they
had since childhood of what cultural
sophistication means and most of us
whether you grew up rich or poor or
middle-class you probably had parents or
grandparents or somebody inculcate into
you this is what it means to be
cosmopolitan this is what it means to be
well-educated this is what it means to
be sophisticated and maybe that involved
listening to classical music or going to
the ballet or reading Shakespeare or
maybe it included traveling to France
and Italy maybe it included traveling to
Japan there was some list of places of
things you should do maybe included
seeing the pyramids in Egypt but maybe
it just included going to some famous
Museum in London or Paris maybe there
was some schedule of things inculcated
into you where you were told if you do
this or if someone has done these things
they are to be respected and esteemed as
worldly and cosmopolitan and as having
these kinds of attitudes but I think on
a very deep level the whole direction
I've taken in this answer reflects the
fact I'm a nihilist I'm not just
nihilistic in relation to organized
religion it's not just that I reject the
existence of the you know the
judeo-christian God I reject all of
these cultural assumptions to me that
whole line of thinking is and
it's poison and it's ultimately based on
you know nationalism and I think it
holds a lot of people back and I think
every year people buy airplane tickets
and buy books and buy library cards and
I think they try to act out that kind of
cultural programming they've received of
what it means to be a refined person or
a sophisticated person what it means to
have that kind of perspective on the
world but there is no such simple
formula there is no such simple answer
and in the same way that you know you
can drive past the
of poverty in your own neighborhood
without ever noticing them the way you
can ignore the epidemic of drug addicts
in your own neighborhood you can also go
to Thailand go to Laos go to Myanmar and
ignore all the current social problems
and you can go to really an ancient
archaeological site and totally miss not
just the significance of those remains
regarded in isolation into themselves
you can miss what the lesson is for you
now living in the 21st century those are
very very hard things to construe and
very very hard things for me to speak
about prescriptively but in your case
for the guy asking this question you
know he gives the example of
deforestation in Southeast Asia I can be
like that Jesuit priest and say hey the
fact that you're asking the question
means that you already have the most
fundamental of answers the fact that
you're searching means that you know the
truth has already found you